From the insurance council.
Yes. Right. Hello? Yes. And yes.
Just checking second submitter. Oh, okay.
We've got two, two separate submitters there. Okay. Right.
Okay. Have you got my, um,
I can time on.
That'd be great. Thanks Dan. Okay.
Um, so come up to the table from the insurance council. Yep.
Please. And, uh, we've got your submission,
which you can take as red.
Um, I will, you've got 10 minutes, so I'll, I'll give you a,
you know, a call with about four to go.
'cause we do like asking questions. That's correct.
Um, but the, the time is yours to highlight anything
that you want to highlight
and, um, I'll start your time later.
Okay. Thank you everyone. Um, my name's John Lucas.
Uh, I'm the insurance manager at the Insurance Council.
Um, I've been, been
around the insurance industry a very long time,
and I've seen, uh, changes with, um,
earthquake prone building legislation over the years.
Um, simply we, we, um, we thank you
for making it possible to, um, make this oral presentation
to the, uh, transport and infrastructure select committee.
We, we acknowledge
that the bill's risk-based approach in identifying,
classifying, strengthening, uh, buildings, um,
is going to save building owners a lot
of money in the future, certainly if those buildings are
outside of the high risk areas.
Um, and we agree that, um, you know, why,
why require everyone to, um,
To upgrade or have dangerous building notices
on their buildings if the risk is quite low.
So, um, money could be spent better elsewhere
on improving their risk or getting their business going.
So, um, there is one thing that's very different
with insurance view of risk,
and that is that we often view life safety risk very
differently to damage risk, which we pay for.
So material damage due to an earthquake, uh, buildings have,
um, potentially high cost of repairs.
And in those cases, insurance premiums will be high.
So there is a disconnect between life safety
and damage to a building.
So you can have life safety,
but you can still have high risk
for insurance related damage.
We have a couple of specific comments, uh,
that might be helpful for the legislation.
Uh, in the bill.
It saves parts of the, um, parts of the building such
as heavy elements like chimneys, parapets,
decorative facades would require removal.
We believe this should also include, uh,
a close look at non-structural elements in buildings such
as unrestrained ceilings, you know, ceiling grids,
petitions, certain services like sprinkler
systems, plumbing and drainage.
Many of those heavy systems can become a life safety issue.
And it's, uh, we have a, a very effective standard in place
that, um, if you follow the standard,
you have good performance.
So that N Zs 4, 2, 1 9 most of the damage
to buildings around Wellington from the 2016 Kai Earthquake
I, which resulting in the non, in the failure
of non-structural elements.
And that's, uh, represented 60 to 70%
of the building's value also.
Um, it's proposed in the bill that with a change of use, uh,
alterations of buildings would not require a fire safety
assessment and, uh, features of fire safety to be upgraded.
We think you'd probably just have to consider
that a little bit more carefully, um, in, in the view that,
um, future tenants
and future insurers may have a different view on fire
safety in that building.
So if the building owner was going
to spend money on the change of use, an upgrade, whatever,
uh, there's probably some need to, to, to, um, outline
that there may need to be, uh, thought given to
fire protection upgrades if required.
Now, our suggestion would be
to simply state in the legislation that, uh,
that would be a minimum position.
However, insurers
and tenants may require improvements to, uh, life safety
for a change of use later time.
So, uh, we wouldn't want the building owner
to embark on an upgrade to later find that, uh,
they can't insure the building.
The insurance, uh, is gonna be very costly
'cause they haven't got fire protection
or the tenant, um, views the fire safety not up to standard
and their own, um, their own issues around, uh, um,
workplace health and safety.
So that's, um, our brief comments on the, on the bill.
Um, this is not part of the bill,
but if, if you don't mind, I'd like to outline a couple
of other things that you might be interested in related to,
to, uh, seismic damage to buildings.
Um, we believe there needs to be a specific repair standard
for seismic damage to our current buildings.
So, um, we rely on,
um, current building standards NZ,
NZDS 11 70 75, um,
that is really designing, that's really designed for,
for actually building something new.
There is nothing really to help us identify
seismic damage and repair it.
Many, but many engineers see a lot of liability in, um,
in offering advice or getting involved in repairs.
Um, and they tend to walk away from some
of those repair views.
And we do see a lot more buildings being written off
following an earthquake.
So we think that, um, there needs
to be some work on that.
We are currently engaged with quake core on developing
feasibility of, of a standard,
and we are looking at the elements of an overseas
guidance document from the states, um, that may help us.
So I just thought that that may be some, um, good news
to many of you here.
The last one is the need for
repair certainty being built into the new low damage seismic
design criteria that MB have, uh,
developing at the moment or has been released.
Uh, again, um,
too many buildings following the KU earthquake in Wellington
2016 were, um,
were not, were viewed as not being economical to repair.
Many of them did have adequate sums insured,
but they were viewed as too complicated to repair
and they were written off.
And that has created a little bit of a problem
for our reputation in New Zealand
buying earthquake insurance.
Many of the reinsurers now see New Zealand
as quite expensive to do business.
Uh, consequently premiums have risen.
We're in a softer market at the moment.
Premiums have gone down.
But longer term we need to demonstrate to, uh,
the insurance market globally that we, uh,
can work efficiently with repairing buildings, suffering,
seismic damage and repair certainty.
You've got a new design, if you can prove to the insurer
that you, it is designed to be repaired, uh, very clear, um,
reasons why it's designed to be repaired, then
that will help keep insurance costs down.
Thank you. Thank you.
Um, Celia, question? No. Okay. Any other questions?
Good. Um, I'll ask, I'll ask one then.
Um, which is just, so a number of these things you said, um,
so the, the actual, um, structural design of the building,
effectively, you said at the moment the
arrangements are about life safety.
And you, and I've heard this from building owners
as well, who get very frustrated.
They put a, you know, a, a building which is base isolated
and everything, and they don't get any benefit whatsoever,
uh, from the insurers for that
because they say, what's about life safety,
not about the building itself at the,
but at the end you then say, well, if you repair it,
if you've got a different approach to repairing, then
that might, um, reduce the insurance cost.
Now I'm struggling to try and reconcile those two things.
Yeah. What does someone need to do to their building
or to the sign of their building to, for an insurer
to look at it and go, actually, that, that one,
you've reduced the risk to the building and
therefore I can reduce your premium. Yep.
The insurer would need to be convinced that the design,
the, the, the structural design of the building is going
to be robust for future earthquake.
And that's not what we always see at the moment.
Uh, we see buildings, you know, generally base isolated,
base isolated building is pretty good,
but it can still suffer damage
that could render it non-economic to repair.
And that's, that's, so,
So that's, that's the key bit.
What we are focused on, what we are,
what we've been talking with the University, university
of Canterbury and Society of Earthquake Engineers
and quake core is we need a system a bit
like repairing a motor vehicle.
You have a repair manual, you can identify the damage
that's occurred, you can price the parts
that need to be replaced.
You can work up, work out a scope of works
that an engineer will happily sign to
'cause they're not taking undue liability
and the world goes on.
So that's what we're missing at the moment.
We're looking at developing that to try
and improve New Zealand's ability to purchase insurance at,
uh, sustainable, um,
Rates. So, so
if you can do that, presumably you ought to be able
to look at existing buildings
and determine whether they are easier or harder to repair.
Yeah, this is, this is where, uh,
the first part I mentioned was the, um, a repair standard,
which we don't have in New Zealand at the moment.
We've got a new building standard.
We don't have a repair standard.
So, uh, everybody argues about
what's feasible and what's not.
You've got the engineer working for the insurer,
the engineer working the building, owner council's got view,
um, a view as well.
So yeah, we don't meet in the middle.
A standard will be something we're all signed to.
And, uh, we follow the standard when we get a,
a future, uh, damage event.
So that's, that's something that needs to be developed.
Now the, the Americans have done it
through the federal emergency management agencies.
So document that they released late last year, uh, sorry,
early last year, um, a few New Zealand engineers, uh, put,
um, they, they, they co-developed it, uh, globally.
It was a, a global effort.
So, um, we are looking at potentially using that
as a model for a standard.
John, thank you. That's very helpful
because the first person that's brought that idea to us.
Thank you. Thanks, John. Right.
McAllister Heights, welcome.
I just, next to me evidence of,
Right. So, um, again,
you, you are down
as an organization down for 10 minutes.
We've got your submission, which you can treat as read,
but anything you'd like to highlight, go for it.
And I'll give you a call with about four minutes to go
just in case you want to leave our questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair Koto, uh, Craig
and I, um, my name's Val Johnston.
I'm the chair of McAllister Heights Body Corporate,
and my colleague here is from the committee, Craig Sallow.
Uh, we're here to represent 28 owners, uh,
from a building in Newtown.
Uh, our buildings seven stories tall, um,
and it was built originally for people of modest means.
The, the apartments are quite small
and it's a pretty basic kind of a building.
Um, and I think that characterization is true today.
Um, as it was then we've got a lot of people
who are beneficiaries, single low income,
precarious work situations in our building.
Um, so we are really in the bottom
of the market in Wellington.
Um, and our story, uh, in terms of size
and strengthening as we were declared earthquake prone in
2010 and soon
after that started on, on the work of working out
how we were going to manage our way out of that.
Uh, we spent $200,000 of our owner's money on design
and investigation work,
and we got to the stage of having a preliminary design
and having that costed and that was done in two, 2021.
And our submission, you can see all of the ins
and outs that we went through, um, in that process.
Um, and so the, where we landed was we got, um, a cost
of $180,000 per apartment to strengthen the building.
Mm-hmm. Um, which since then will have risen by
through just even just basic inflation.
We'll take that up to over 220.
So you can kind of imagine the impact on an entry level
apartment building, uh, unit, um, of that kind
of money in, in Wellington.
So we, um, are not expecting a lot to change
with the proposed regime.
We've had a look at the review
and all the documents that envy's prepared,
and we understand that we'll be subject
to what's called a targeted retrofit.
Um, and we are not expecting our, the requirement
to strengthen, to change an awful lot.
Um, that's our current expectation based on the amount
of strengthening that the building
that the engineers said we'd need to do the various things.
So, um, I'm gonna pass to Craig now
and he can talk more about what we are looking for and why.
Thanks, Mel. So if we're required to strengthen,
we will need, we think we need two things.
Firstly, we think we need some form
of dispensary loan scheme for our most vulnerable people
so they can, uh, have access to capital
and can continue to afford home ownership.
Uh, in the past, this has been provided by government,
but it could be provided by the banks
with government support so
that we think there's some options there to explore.
Secondly, we, we need some sort
of grant funding from government to pay so
that we pay our fair share of the costs.
We support the seismic review steering group
and the IIC W'S call for a further review, uh,
on some financial support.
Uh, we think that should affect the standard set
by the previous national government, the government of, uh,
um, needing to be fair and reasonable.
And, uh, this in our view, should have been part
of the original view done by, uh, mb.
Uh, according to the, the terms of reference approved
by cabinet, there are at least seven reasons why we think
the support should be provided.
Firstly, there are no other government requirements
that require people to pay costs of this size.
Secondly, the policy that is trying
to reduce harm is causing harm in the form of stress,
significant financial loss and uncertainty to owners.
Thirdly, if there is a justification
for regulation IE public benefit,
then not all costs should fall on owners.
Fourth seismic strengthening activity generates significant
revenue for the crown activity.
That would not happen without regulation.
It is reasonable to, to use that revenue
to offset costs to owners.
Five commercial owners have the ability to claim back some
of these costs against income owner occupiers can't,
in real terms, they end up paying more.
Six our view, it's better
to spend money on prevention than a disaster.
And seven New Zealanders an international outlier
and not providing support to residential owners
to strengthen health.
Thanks Craig. So just to finish off, we wanna talk about
what, uh, what our options are.
If the proposed legislation goes through,
we think we're gonna end up with two options.
One is to do nothing and we continue to live
with uncertainty, stress,
and eventually, um, uh, enforcement outcome
through the Wellington City Council.
Uh, the second option is to try
and push ahead with a strengthening project.
If we manage to secure finance
and got through that, then at some point, um, all
of the owners will realize a significant, uh,
financial loss through that process.
So, uh, we, it's our view that the neither
of those options are reasonable things to put in, in front
of New Zealand citizens.
And we welcome any questions. Thank
You. We've got just under five,
five minutes left, David.
Well, thank you for the, the presentation.
It's very clear submission and the bill for these people.
Um, I guess for a lot of 'em, this is all they have.
The land is lease sold, so if they lose the building,
Oh, we've now bought the freehold interest. Oh, you have
Bought the free, Oh, well that's for this,
for this reason to square up our financial position. I,
I hadn't that somewhat better, but yeah.
Um, I mean the, the, there's a good argument
that if the, the government's going to put cost for people
by regulating it should compensate them.
Um, but I also know a bit about the government's finances.
Yeah. Um, if they weren't prepared to do that,
how would it be received by the residents
if there was some sort of, I guess,
compassionate relief from the requirements?
I mean, I realize that still leaves them exposed
to earthquake risk, but it might at least say, look,
you know, and because there will be buildings,
and I've come across a few over the years where the people
for whatever reason just can't afford, I mean the,
the New Zealand Medical Council building up the, the,
the terrorists that they had heritage protection,
so they couldn't change it earthquake strengthening.
So they had to change it and no money.
They've subsequently gone broke.
Um, I wonder if some sort
of compassionate relief might be seen as a positive or
Could be. We, we
wondered about this scenario when we were,
when we were waiting for the review to be completed,
and we wondered whether we might end up in a situation
where we were no longer considered earthquake prone,
but we had been declared Earthquake Pro in the past,
and so we're kind of living with that shadow.
Um, and we thought that that would
be a less than ideal outcome for ourselves, um,
because it leaves owners with a sort
of an impaired asset still in terms
of its value and its saleability. Yeah.
In a way, the original declaration is your problem. Yes,
That's right.
That's when the first harm was, was created.
Yeah. Um, if I could,
Sorry guys, Just one other,
if we make it reasonably quick.
So you, you've got specific advice from MB about
how you would be assessed under the new laws,
even though it would require final, um, details
to be released before you can be certain, um,
We, we, yeah, sorry.
We, we've just made some assumptions based on the
discussions we've had with MB to date that we think based on
that information, our expectation, you know,
and look, things haven't gone
our way to date in this process.
Mm-hmm. Uh, that, that we would still make that be
Very more about we could talk. No, sorry.
That's, that's good. Um, just thank you.
Can you be clear what the, um,
because I suspect you're probably right.
The, this, the building is built off,
Uh, reinforced concrete. Concrete
Reinforced concrete. Yeah.
Correct. Okay. Right. Okay.
Um, and, and what's its, um, what's its rating,
because one of the other things which we've had particularly
from inner city Wellington is
because the ratings keep changing.
Yeah. Um, that you were okay one day
and then the next day you're not. Okay. So we
Weren't Okay. It is just retrospective.
We weren't
Retro Retrospective.
So Yeah. So when, when in 2010, so Wellington City Council
for the first council to get off the ground with Earth.
Yeah. Um, and back then we got assessed at,
I think we were 26%, but
You were always correct. Always are.
That's right. And then of course the standards have gone
up since then, so we would probably
expect to be lower than that now.
Okay. But at least one thing for, and it may not help you,
but it would help some of the others.
Um, but you know, if, you know, if you,
if you've strengthened it, you've done your strengthening
that that is it and
that the government can't come along later on,
change the rules and then suddenly you're no longer,
Um, that's right. Yeah.
That's one of the things that we've asked
for certainty on in our submission. Yeah. Okay. Yeah,
No, that, that would be helpful.
Uh, so reinforce concrete. Okay. That's cool. Thank you.
Um, and just the other one is just in terms of one
of the ideas which has been worked through, um,
between councils and the government is the, is it's a, um,
resident financing scheme, which basically, um,
allows you a, a, a, uh, somebody who can borrow
effectively the councils and the crown Mm.
At a, um, lower, uh, rate of interest. Mm-hmm.
Uh, that allows, that makes it easier.
And the kind of things that you've been talked about are
this, this sort of thing.
Um, and, you know, um, uh, so re solar, solar, solar
and that sort of stuff and, you know, insulation,
those sort of things, building improvements.
Yeah. Um, would that be helpful to have access to a
lower rate of interest to finance anything?
The, the, the suspensory nature
of the loan is the key thing.
So the problem that we have, uh, is that a number
of our people just can't afford to, um, to service that kind
of large scale financing.
They just don't have the,
the day-to-day funding to be able to do that.
So that, that's where a dispensary me mechanism works quite
well because when they sell or, and or, you know,
and move on, then that the,
the loan can be repaid at that point.
So that would be the key feature
that we would need and for that to work.
Yeah. Okay. Understand that. But thank you.
Our time is up. Um, we do have to do one more thing
before we get back to the house,
so we really appreciate that.
And, um, you've given us, we, we know the issue,
but least certainly goes, will do.
Yeah. Thank you. Nice to see you.